NOTES.md, before:

# Setup

## Windows

- Download npcap installer AND SDK from <https://npcap.com/#download>
  - Or install npcap with the Wireshark installer
- Copy npcap SDK to `./npcap-sdk-1.12`
- Make sure you install with "winpcap compatibility mode" option checked
- `$env:LIBPCAP_LIBDIR = 'C:\Windows\System32\Npcap'` - yes, the 32 bit version for some reason
- `$env:LIB = 'C:\Users\jamwa\Repositories\ethercrab\npcap-sdk-1.12\Lib\x64'` otherwise it fails to
  link
- `cargo run --example write-garbage-packet` or whatever

# Windows TwinCAT Wireshark capture (EK1100)

- Connect EK1100 through switch
- Connect USB ethernet to switch as well
- Tell TwinCAT to use USB ethernet
- Sniff traffic using motherboard NIC

## TwinCAT - finding topology

Double click device and go to `EtherCAT` tab in main view

## TwinCAT - see ports

Go to `Online` tab of any device

# SOEM on Windows

- Install VSCode `CMake Tools` extension
- Install `nmake` through `Build Tools for Visual Studio 2022` from
  [here](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/)
  - I think it's the "C++ development tools" package or something
- Do this to the top level so the Windows `slaveinfo` builds:

  ```diff
    if(BUILD_TESTS)
      add_subdirectory(test/simple_ng)
  +   # add_subdirectory(test/linux/slaveinfo)
  -   add_subdirectory(test/linux/slaveinfo)
      add_subdirectory(test/linux/eepromtool)
  +   # add_subdirectory(test/linux/simple_test)
  -   add_subdirectory(test/linux/simple_test)
  +   add_subdirectory(test/win32/slaveinfo)
  +   add_subdirectory(test/win32/simple_test)
    endif()
  ```

- Copy and paste `CMakeLists.txt` from `test/linux/{test}/` to `test/win32/{test}/`.
- To squelch warnings as errors, find a line like the following, and remove `/WX`:

  ```cmake
  set(CMAKE_C_FLAGS "${CMAKE_C_FLAGS}  /WX")
  ```

- `nmake` only works in the "Visual Studio Powershell" or whatever, not vanilla powershell:
  - Open "Developer PowerShell for VS 2022" from the start menu
  - Follow instructions in SOEM readme:
    - `mkdir build`
    - `cd build`
    - `cmake .. -G "NMake Makefiles"`
    - `nmake`

# Windows and L2 sockets

<https://github.com/rustasync/team/issues/15>

Windows doesn't support L2 networking out of the box - a driver is required, e.g. libpcap or WinPcap

Because libpnet isn't really conducive to async, we pretty much can't do async on Windows at all.

Let's just use async stuff with an "in flight packets" queue for now

# Embassy async raw sockets

you can easily wrap them into async like this though

```rust
poll_fn(|cx| {
    if device.is_transmit_ready() {
        Poll::Ready(())
    } else {
        device.register_waker(cx.waker());
        Poll::Pending
    }
}).await;
device.transmit(pkt);
```

or for receive

```rust
let received_pkt = poll_fn(|cx| match device.receive() {
     Some(pkt) => Poll::Ready(pkt)
     None => {
          device.register_waker(cx.waker());
          Poll::Pending
    }
}).await;
```

Note however:

> ah, but receive() and register_waker() are separate calls, so an irq can definitely sneak in
> between them

So to fix:

```rust
async fn transmit(&mut self, pkt: PacketBuf) {
    poll_fn(|cx| {
        self.device.register_waker(cx.waker());
        match self.device.is_transmit_ready() {
            true => Poll::Ready(()),
            false => Poll::Pending,
        }
    }).await;
    self.device.transmit(pkt);
}

async fn receive(&mut self) -> PacketBuf {
    poll_fn(|cx| {
        self.device.register_waker(cx.waker());
        match self.device.receive() {
            Some(pkt) => Poll::Ready(pkt),
            false => Poll::Pending,
        }
    }).await
}
```

Can only register one waker for both TX + RX, so the suggestion is to have a device task and have
channels to send `PacketBuf`s between it and whatever else is waiting for them.

> PacketBuf is just ptr+length so it's fine to do a Channel<PacketBuf>, you won't be actually
> copying packets around

I can then have a single `poll_fn` that handles both TX and RX, using the channels appropriately.

Can't bind a task to an interrupt in Embassy, but I could do:

```rust
#[embassy::task]
async fn my_task(..) {
    loop {
        let pkt = device.receive().await;
        // process pkt
    }
}
```

But note:

> or a channel receive if you want to do tx/rx from separate tasks, because you can't share/split
> the Device itself

## ways to share stuff

- `put()` in a `Forever<Cell<Thing>>` in main, send `&'static Cell<Thing>` as an argument to tasks
- `put()` in a `Forever<RefCell<Thing>>` in main, send `&'static RefCell<Thing>` as an argument to
  tasks -- warning make sure not to hold a Ref across an await
- Global ThreadModeMutex, if all tasks run in thread mode, which is the default
- Global CriticalSectionMutex if not (if using InterruptExecutor or raw irq handlers)
- Channels kinda
- async Mutex (this is best for stuff you need to call async methods on, like shared spi/i2c buses)

Some rough pseudocode by @dirbaio on Element:

```rust
struct Client {
    state: RefCell<ClientState>,
}

struct ClientState {
    waker: WakerRegistration,
    requests: [Option<RequestState>; N],
}

struct RequestState {
    waker: WakerRegistration,
    state: RequestStateEnum,
}

enum RequestStateEnum {
    Created{payload: [u8;N]},
    Waiting,
    Done{response: [u8;N]},
}

#[embassy::task]
async fn client_task(device: Device, client: &'static Client) {
    poll_fn(|cx| {
        let client = &mut *self.client.borrow_mut();
        client.waker.register(cx.waker);
        device.register_waker(self.waker);

        // process tx
        for each request in client.requests{
            match request.state {
                Created(payload) => {
                    // if we can't send it now, try again later.
                    if !device.transmit_ready() {
                        break;
                    }
                    device.transmit(payload);
                    request.state = Waiting
                }
                _ => {}
            }
        }

        // process rx
        while let Some(pkt) = device.receive() {
            // parse pkt
            let req = // find waiting request matching the packet
            req.state = Done{payload};
            req.waker.wake();
        }
    })
}

impl Client {
    async fn do_request(&self, payload: [u8;N]) -> [u8;N] {
        // braces to ensure we don't hold the refcell across awaits!!
        let slot = {
            let client = &mut *self.client.borrow_mut();
            let slot: usize = // find empty slot in client.requests
            client.requests[slot] = Some(RequestState{
                state: Created(payload),
                ...
            });
            client.waker.wake();
            slot
        };

        poll_fn(|cx| {
            let client = &mut *self.client.borrow_mut();
            client.requests[slot].waker.register(cx.waker);
            match client.requests[slot].state {
                Done(payload) => Poll::Ready(payload),
                _ => Poll::Pending
            }
        }).await
    }
}
```

> the key is you share just data
>
> so instead of txing from the task doing the req, you just set some state saying "there's this
> request pending to be sent"
>
> and then the client_task sends it

# Cross platform logging

Support `defmt` as well as `log` (no_std and std) with
[this](https://github.com/embassy-rs/embassy/blob/master/embassy/src/fmt.rs)

It has feature flags and macros to select between them.

dirbaio
[says](https://matrix.to/#/!yhYQWkYvbEWASqoKIM:matrix.org/$R8BYMVarPIRBZpuqOtkINc6p6KF2jUBpmXX4UNITYUQ?via=beeper.com&via=matrix.org&via=grusbv.com):

> paste [this](https://github.com/embassy-rs/embassy/blob/master/embassy/src/fmt.rs) into your
> crate, it allows using either `defmt` or `log` directly depending on Cargo features
>
> so you use `log` directly, you don't need a `defmt`->`log` adapter
>
> `defmt` needs linker hax to compile for linux targets, and doesn't compile for windows, mac, ios
> targets at all

# EEPROM read abstraction

EEPROM is word-based, but I want to read bytes so let's make an abstraction:

- EEPROM section iterator
- Start address as u16
- Length limit
- next().await gives me a byte at a time
  - Read 4/8 byte chunk, split off the first element until error, then increment address by chunk
    len / 2 and read another chunk
- skip(n) takes number of BYTES to skip
  - next u16 read address = current byte address / 2
  - replace chunk
  - if n is odd, call next() once to discard initial byte
- take_vec()
  - while vec can be pushed AND address is less than start + len, next().await
  - return vec on push error
  - Can be optimised with chunked pushes:
    - Read chunk, increment byte counter by chunk len, address by chunk len /2
    - Check remaining bytes in section and clip chunk
    - If chunk len is 0, return buffer, else:
    - Write chunk into return buffer
      - If write fails,
        - If we have space left, push partial chunk
        - Return buffer

# PDI

- Send PDI in chunks of `MAX_PDU_DATA`
- Core concept for thread safety: Slaves must be grouped
  - I can provide a nice API to get a single default group maybe
- Each group has its own PDI with a start address and length or whatever
- Iteration looks like this:

  ```rust
  let interval = Interval::new(Duration::from_millis(2));

  while let Some(_) = interval.next().await {
      group.tx_rx(&client).await;

      // Or whatever
      group.slave_by_index(0).outputs()[0] = 0xff;

      for slave in group.slaves_mut() {
          // Whatever
      }
  }
  ```

- Because each group is non-overlapping, we don't need to lock in `group.tx_rx().await`
- Groups are `Send` but not `Sync`; they can be moved to a thread but NOT shared.
- Sharing data between groups is up to the user, e.g. SPSC or other means to keep things safe. A bit
  of a copout but it means we don't get data races by default.
- Assign a group ID to each discovered slave before init, using a closure and maybe make group IDs
  generic to the user. Or maybe not; a group ID should map to a number for indexing reasons. Maybe
  just `Into<usize>` for the user's type? That would allow nice enums like `Safety, Servos, IO`, etc
- Groups should be separate from `client` - the list of slaves should store enough info to be useful
  to users. `client` should only be used for tx/rx

## Another idea for slave config/grouping

```rust
struct Groups {
    io: SlaveGroup<16>,
    servos: SlaveGroup<3>
}

// Closure must return a reference to a SlaveGroup to insert the slave into
let groups = client.init::<Groups>(|&mut groups, slave, idx| {
  if slave.id == 0xwhatever {
    Some(&mut groups.io)
  } else if slave.manu == 0xwhatever {
    Some(&mut groups.servos)
  } else {
    // Might want to ignore a detected slave - maybe it's not a recognised device. Add config option
    // to make this an error?
    None
  }
}).await.unwrap();

// init()
// - Detect all slaves
// - TODO: Add some basic info to them like manufacturer ID, name, etc so people can identify them
//   - For now I'll just return an index
// - Loop through them all, passing into closure to get the group to insert into
// - While we have a ref to the group, initialise the slave in it and update its PDI map
// - Return groups when we're done

struct SlaveGroup<const N: usize> {
    slaves: heapless::Vec<Slave, N>
}

impl SlaveGroup {
    fn new() -> Self {
        // This could probably impl default
        Self { slaves: heapless::Vec::new() }
    }

    async fn init_from_eeprom_and_push(&mut self, &client, slave) -> Result<(), Error> {
        // What the client already does, but scoped to a group.
        // Needs to also return the PDI offset ready for the next group to use.
    }

    pub async fn tx_rx(&self, &client) -> Result<(), Error> {
        //
    }
}
```

# Group configuration without `Box dyn`

Forget hotplug and dynamic reconfig for now so we don't have to store a closure in each group. This
can be added back in when stable has the right features to make it not-box. Errors will either mean
looping back to the top of the program or just panicking I'm afraid...

- Still box future but works with new design
  <https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=ee24e35922409fdcf9bac6c490c2e373>
- No more box, but it's only `FnOnce` so doesn't work in a loop like EtherCrab needs
  <https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=8d28e2ae86c98bfeedc03d23d4790a4f>
- It works! We can even have `FnMut` if we want
  <https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=cb13fe888d80b2ab6daa0f91bfd92120>

Perhaps we can refactor the groups using typestates like e.g.

```rust
let groups = client.assign_slaves(Groups::default(), |g, s| { ... }).await?;

// Groups are in PreOp at this point
let Groups { fast, slow } = client.init(...);

// These could move into their respective tasks/threads if they don't use outside data, or make sure
// outside data is `Sync` or whatever.
let fast: SlaveGroup<Op> = fast.start_op(|slave| { ... }).await?;
let slow: SlaveGroup<Op> = slow.start_op(|slave| { ... }).await?;

impl SlaveGroup<PreOp> {
    // Individual phases can be opened up in the future, like `into_safe_op`, `into_op`, etc

    /// Put the group all the way to PreOp -> SafeOp -> Op
    pub async fn into_op(self, hook: F) -> Result<SlaveGroup<Op>>, ()> {
        // Do group stuff in PreOp

        // Call hook

        // Do more group stuff or whatever

        // Put group into SafeOp

        // Internal methods which we could make pub in the future
        let g = Self { ..., _state: GroupState::SafeOp }

        // Put group into Op, wait for state

        // All good
        Ok(Self { ..., _state: GroupState::Op })
    }
}

impl SlaveGroup<Op> {
    async fn tx_rx(&self) -> Result<(), Error> {
        // ...
    }

    // Future stuff. Neat!
    // Maybe INIT instead of PREOP?
    pub async fn shutdown(self) -> Result<SlaveGroup<PreOp>>, Error>
}
```

This requires that slaves can be put into different states as groups, not all at once, but I think
this is fine as EtherCrab does this already.

`SlaveGroup<SafeOp>` and `SlaveGroup<Op>`.

# Remote packet capture on Linux

Allow root login with `PermitRootLogin yes` in `/etc/ssh/sshd_config` (then restart sshd service).

```bash
ssh root@ethercrab tcpdump -U -s0 -i enp2s0 -w - | sudo wireshark -k -i -
```

# Jitter measurements

All run with `--release` on `Linux 5.15.0-1032-realtime #35-Ubuntu SMP PREEMPT_RT`, i3-7100T.

```bash
just linux-example-release jitter enp2s0
```

| Test case                                                      | standard deviation (ns) | mean (ns) | comments                                          |
| -------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------- | --------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| 5ms `tokio` timer                                              | 361909                  | 4998604   |                                                   |
| 5ms `tokio-timerfd`                                            | 4264\*                  | 4997493   | std. dev. jumped from 2646 to 4508ns during test  |
| 5ms `tokio-timerfd` + pinned tx/rx thread                      | 14315\*                 | 4997157   | std. dev. jumped from 2945 to 15280ns during test |
| 5ms `tokio-timerfd` + pinned tx/rx thread + pinned loop thread | 117284                  | 4997443   | std. dev. jumps around a lot but max is huge      |
| 5ms `smol::Timer`                                              | 5391\*                  | 4997841   | std. dev. jumped to 11558ns during test           |
| 1ms `smol::Timer`                                              | 21218\*                 | 997581    | Highest std. dev. I saw was 21k ns                |
| 1ms `smol::Timer`, another run                                 | 19224\*                 | 997483    | Just under 2% jitter at 1ms                       |

## Results from oscilloscope

This is running the "1ms `smol::Timer`, another run" case from above, measuring output 1 of an
EL2004 hooked up to an EK1100.

| Measurement                  | Value         |
| ---------------------------- | ------------- |
| Mean (software)              | 997456ns      |
| std. dev. (software)         | 72038ns (~7%) |
| Period std. dev. (oscope)    | ~15us         |
| Frequency std. dev. (oscope) | ~3.5Hz        |

The display flickers occasionally showing some occasional glitches in the output stream which isn't
great. I'm not sure where those might be coming from...

## Kernel/OS/hardware tuning

A good looking guide at <https://rigtorp.se/low-latency-guide/>.

### First changeset

- `tuned-adm profile latency-performance`
- Disable hyperthreading at runtime with `echo off > /sys/devices/system/cpu/smt/control`

#### Run 1

Promising results. 4500ns SD (software), saw a jump up to 16360ns. Seems happy at 15000ns (1.54%)
SD.

Oscope shows 600ns SD (but is shrinking all the time).

I think there was one hiccup at the beginning of the test which skewed the results.

#### Run 2

650ns SW SD, 20ns oscope SD, but reducing continuously.

Saw a jump up to 1156 SW SD not long after startup again, but reducing all the time during run.

Saw a 5676ns (SW) jump, pushed oscope SD up to ~300ns.

Saw a 9265ns (SW) jump, pushed oscope SD up to ~350ns.

Saw a 19565ns (2%) SW jump, pushed oscope SD up to 772ns.

Saw a 28264ns (2.8%) SW jump, pushed oscope SD up to 700ns.

Commit message:

Don't use `tokio` even with `tokio-timerfd`

NOTES.md, after:

# Setup

## Windows

- Download npcap installer AND SDK from <https://npcap.com/#download>
  - Or install npcap with the Wireshark installer
- Copy npcap SDK to `./npcap-sdk-1.12`
- Make sure you install with "winpcap compatibility mode" option checked
- `$env:LIBPCAP_LIBDIR = 'C:\Windows\System32\Npcap'` - yes, the 32 bit version for some reason
- `$env:LIB = 'C:\Users\jamwa\Repositories\ethercrab\npcap-sdk-1.12\Lib\x64'` otherwise it fails to
  link
- `cargo run --example write-garbage-packet` or whatever

# Windows TwinCAT Wireshark capture (EK1100)

- Connect EK1100 through switch
- Connect USB ethernet to switch as well
- Tell TwinCAT to use USB ethernet
- Sniff traffic using motherboard NIC

## TwinCAT - finding topology

Double click device and go to `EtherCAT` tab in main view

## TwinCAT - see ports

Go to `Online` tab of any device

# SOEM on Windows

- Install VSCode `CMake Tools` extension
- Install `nmake` through `Build Tools for Visual Studio 2022` from
  [here](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/)
  - I think it's the "C++ development tools" package or something
- Do this to the top level so the Windows `slaveinfo` builds:

  ```diff
    if(BUILD_TESTS)
      add_subdirectory(test/simple_ng)
  +   # add_subdirectory(test/linux/slaveinfo)
  -   add_subdirectory(test/linux/slaveinfo)
      add_subdirectory(test/linux/eepromtool)
  +   # add_subdirectory(test/linux/simple_test)
  -   add_subdirectory(test/linux/simple_test)
  +   add_subdirectory(test/win32/slaveinfo)
  +   add_subdirectory(test/win32/simple_test)
    endif()
  ```

- Copy and paste `CMakeLists.txt` from `test/linux/{test}/` to `test/win32/{test}/`.
- To squelch warnings as errors, find a line like the following, and remove `/WX`:

  ```cmake
  set(CMAKE_C_FLAGS "${CMAKE_C_FLAGS}  /WX")
  ```

- `nmake` only works in the "Visual Studio Powershell" or whatever, not vanilla powershell:
  - Open "Developer PowerShell for VS 2022" from the start menu
  - Follow instructions in SOEM readme:
    - `mkdir build`
    - `cd build`
    - `cmake .. -G "NMake Makefiles"`
    - `nmake`

# Windows and L2 sockets

<https://github.com/rustasync/team/issues/15>

Windows doesn't support L2 networking out of the box - a driver is required, e.g. libpcap or WinPcap

Because libpnet isn't really conducive to async, we pretty much can't do async on Windows at all.

Let's just use async stuff with an "in flight packets" queue for now

# Embassy async raw sockets

you can easily wrap them into async like this though

```rust
poll_fn(|cx| {
    if device.is_transmit_ready() {
        Poll::Ready(())
    } else {
        device.register_waker(cx.waker());
        Poll::Pending
    }
}).await;
device.transmit(pkt);
```

or for receive

```rust
let received_pkt = poll_fn(|cx| match device.receive() {
     Some(pkt) => Poll::Ready(pkt)
     None => {
          device.register_waker(cx.waker());
          Poll::Pending
    }
}).await;
```

Note however:

> ah, but receive() and register_waker() are separate calls, so an irq can definitely sneak in
> between them

So to fix:

```rust
async fn transmit(&mut self, pkt: PacketBuf) {
    poll_fn(|cx| {
        self.device.register_waker(cx.waker());
        match self.device.is_transmit_ready() {
            true => Poll::Ready(()),
            false => Poll::Pending,
        }
    }).await;
    self.device.transmit(pkt);
}

async fn receive(&mut self) -> PacketBuf {
    poll_fn(|cx| {
        self.device.register_waker(cx.waker());
        match self.device.receive() {
            Some(pkt) => Poll::Ready(pkt),
            false => Poll::Pending,
        }
    }).await
}
```

Can only register one waker for both TX + RX, so the suggestion is to have a device task and have
channels to send `PacketBuf`s between it and whatever else is waiting for them.

> PacketBuf is just ptr+length so it's fine to do a Channel<PacketBuf>, you won't be actually
> copying packets around

I can then have a single `poll_fn` that handles both TX and RX, using the channels appropriately.

Can't bind a task to an interrupt in Embassy, but I could do:

```rust
#[embassy::task]
async fn my_task(..) {
    loop {
        let pkt = device.receive().await;
        // process pkt
    }
}
```

But note:

> or a channel receive if you want to do tx/rx from separate tasks, because you can't share/split
> the Device itself

## ways to share stuff

- `put()` in a `Forever<Cell<Thing>>` in main, send `&'static Cell<Thing>` as an argument to tasks
- `put()` in a `Forever<RefCell<Thing>>` in main, send `&'static RefCell<Thing>` as an argument to
  tasks -- warning make sure not to hold a Ref across an await
- Global ThreadModeMutex, if all tasks run in thread mode, which is the default
- Global CriticalSectionMutex if not (if using InterruptExecutor or raw irq handlers)
- Channels kinda
- async Mutex (this is best for stuff you need to call async methods on, like shared spi/i2c buses)

Some rough pseudocode by @dirbaio on Element:

```rust
struct Client {
    state: RefCell<ClientState>,
}

struct ClientState {
    waker: WakerRegistration,
    requests: [Option<RequestState>; N],
}

struct RequestState {
    waker: WakerRegistration,
    state: RequestStateEnum,
}

enum RequestStateEnum {
    Created{payload: [u8;N]},
    Waiting,
    Done{response: [u8;N]},
}

#[embassy::task]
async fn client_task(device: Device, client: &'static Client) {
    poll_fn(|cx| {
        let client = &mut *self.client.borrow_mut();
        client.waker.register(cx.waker);
        device.register_waker(self.waker);

        // process tx
        for each request in client.requests{
            match request.state {
                Created(payload) => {
                    // if we can't send it now, try again later.
                    if !device.transmit_ready() {
                        break;
                    }
                    device.transmit(payload);
                    request.state = Waiting
                }
                _ => {}
            }
        }

        // process rx
        while let Some(pkt) = device.receive() {
            // parse pkt
            let req = // find waiting request matching the packet
            req.state = Done{payload};
            req.waker.wake();
        }
    })
}

impl Client {
    async fn do_request(&self, payload: [u8;N]) -> [u8;N] {
        // braces to ensure we don't hold the refcell across awaits!!
        let slot = {
            let client = &mut *self.client.borrow_mut();
            let slot: usize = // find empty slot in client.requests
            client.requests[slot] = Some(RequestState{
                state: Created(payload),
                ...
            });
            client.waker.wake();
            slot
        };

        poll_fn(|cx| {
            let client = &mut *self.client.borrow_mut();
            client.requests[slot].waker.register(cx.waker);
            match client.requests[slot].state {
                Done(payload) => Poll::Ready(payload),
                _ => Poll::Pending
            }
        }).await
    }
}
```

> the key is you share just data
>
> so instead of txing from the task doing the req, you just set some state saying "there's this
> request pending to be sent"
>
> and then the client_task sends it

# Cross platform logging

Support `defmt` as well as `log` (no_std and std) with
[this](https://github.com/embassy-rs/embassy/blob/master/embassy/src/fmt.rs)

It has feature flags and macros to select between them.

dirbaio
[says](https://matrix.to/#/!yhYQWkYvbEWASqoKIM:matrix.org/$R8BYMVarPIRBZpuqOtkINc6p6KF2jUBpmXX4UNITYUQ?via=beeper.com&via=matrix.org&via=grusbv.com):

> paste [this](https://github.com/embassy-rs/embassy/blob/master/embassy/src/fmt.rs) into your
> crate, it allows using either `defmt` or `log` directly depending on Cargo features
>
> so you use `log` directly, you don't need a `defmt`->`log` adapter
>
> `defmt` needs linker hax to compile for linux targets, and doesn't compile for windows, mac, ios
> targets at all

# EEPROM read abstraction

EEPROM is word-based, but I want to read bytes so let's make an abstraction:

- EEPROM section iterator
- Start address as u16
- Length limit
- next().await gives me a byte at a time
  - Read 4/8 byte chunk, split off the first element until error, then increment address by chunk
    len / 2 and read another chunk
- skip(n) takes number of BYTES to skip
  - next u16 read address = current byte address / 2
  - replace chunk
  - if n is odd, call next() once to discard initial byte
- take_vec()
  - while vec can be pushed AND address is less than start + len, next().await
  - return vec on push error
  - Can be optimised with chunked pushes:
    - Read chunk, increment byte counter by chunk len, address by chunk len /2
    - Check remaining bytes in section and clip chunk
    - If chunk len is 0, return buffer, else:
    - Write chunk into return buffer
      - If write fails,
        - If we have space left, push partial chunk
        - Return buffer

# PDI

- Send PDI in chunks of `MAX_PDU_DATA`
- Core concept for thread safety: Slaves must be grouped
  - I can provide a nice API to get a single default group maybe
- Each group has its own PDI with a start address and length or whatever
- Iteration looks like this:

  ```rust
  let interval = Interval::new(Duration::from_millis(2));

  while let Some(_) = interval.next().await {
      group.tx_rx(&client).await;

      // Or whatever
      group.slave_by_index(0).outputs()[0] = 0xff;

      for slave in group.slaves_mut() {
          // Whatever
      }
  }
  ```

- Because each group is non-overlapping, we don't need to lock in `group.tx_rx().await`
- Groups are `Send` but not `Sync`; they can be moved to a thread but NOT shared.
- Sharing data between groups is up to the user, e.g. SPSC or other means to keep things safe. A bit
  of a copout but it means we don't get data races by default.
- Assign a group ID to each discovered slave before init, using a closure and maybe make group IDs
  generic to the user. Or maybe not; a group ID should map to a number for indexing reasons. Maybe
  just `Into<usize>` for the user's type? That would allow nice enums like `Safety, Servos, IO`, etc
- Groups should be separate from `client` - the list of slaves should store enough info to be useful
  to users. `client` should only be used for tx/rx

## Another idea for slave config/grouping

```rust
struct Groups {
    io: SlaveGroup<16>,
    servos: SlaveGroup<3>
}

// Closure must return a reference to a SlaveGroup to insert the slave into
let groups = client.init::<Groups>(|&mut groups, slave, idx| {
  if slave.id == 0xwhatever {
    Some(&mut groups.io)
  } else if slave.manu == 0xwhatever {
    Some(&mut groups.servos)
  } else {
    // Might want to ignore a detected slave - maybe it's not a recognised device. Add config option
    // to make this an error?
    None
  }
}).await.unwrap();

// init()
// - Detect all slaves
// - TODO: Add some basic info to them like manufacturer ID, name, etc so people can identify them
//   - For now I'll just return an index
// - Loop through them all, passing into closure to get the group to insert into
// - While we have a ref to the group, initialise the slave in it and update its PDI map
// - Return groups when we're done

struct SlaveGroup<const N: usize> {
    slaves: heapless::Vec<Slave, N>
}

impl SlaveGroup {
    fn new() -> Self {
        // This could probably impl default
        Self { slaves: heapless::Vec::new() }
    }

    async fn init_from_eeprom_and_push(&mut self, &client, slave) -> Result<(), Error> {
        // What the client already does, but scoped to a group.
        // Needs to also return the PDI offset ready for the next group to use.
    }

    pub async fn tx_rx(&self, &client) -> Result<(), Error> {
        //
    }
}
```

# Group configuration without `Box dyn`

Forget hotplug and dynamic reconfig for now so we don't have to store a closure in each group. This
can be added back in when stable has the right features to make it not-box. Errors will either mean
looping back to the top of the program or just panicking I'm afraid...

- Still box future but works with new design
  <https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=ee24e35922409fdcf9bac6c490c2e373>
- No more box, but it's only `FnOnce` so doesn't work in a loop like EtherCrab needs
  <https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=8d28e2ae86c98bfeedc03d23d4790a4f>
- It works! We can even have `FnMut` if we want
  <https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=cb13fe888d80b2ab6daa0f91bfd92120>

Perhaps we can refactor the groups using typestates like e.g.

```rust
let groups = client.assign_slaves(Groups::default(), |g, s| { ... }).await?;

// Groups are in PreOp at this point
let Groups { fast, slow } = client.init(...);

// These could move into their respective tasks/threads if they don't use outside data, or make sure
// outside data is `Sync` or whatever.
let fast: SlaveGroup<Op> = fast.start_op(|slave| { ... }).await?;
let slow: SlaveGroup<Op> = slow.start_op(|slave| { ... }).await?;

impl SlaveGroup<PreOp> {
    // Individual phases can be opened up in the future, like `into_safe_op`, `into_op`, etc

    /// Put the group all the way to PreOp -> SafeOp -> Op
    pub async fn into_op(self, hook: F) -> Result<SlaveGroup<Op>>, ()> {
        // Do group stuff in PreOp

        // Call hook

        // Do more group stuff or whatever

        // Put group into SafeOp

        // Internal methods which we could make pub in the future
        let g = Self { ..., _state: GroupState::SafeOp }

        // Put group into Op, wait for state

        // All good
        Ok(Self { ..., _state: GroupState::Op })
    }
}

impl SlaveGroup<Op> {
    async fn tx_rx(&self) -> Result<(), Error> {
        // ...
    }

    // Future stuff. Neat!
    // Maybe INIT instead of PREOP?
    pub async fn shutdown(self) -> Result<SlaveGroup<PreOp>>, Error>
}
```

This requires that slaves can be put into different states as groups, not all at once, but I think
this is fine as EtherCrab does this already.

`SlaveGroup<SafeOp>` and `SlaveGroup<Op>`.

# Remote packet capture on Linux

Allow root login with `PermitRootLogin yes` in `/etc/ssh/sshd_config` (then restart sshd service).

```bash
ssh root@ethercrab tcpdump -U -s0 -i enp2s0 -w - | sudo wireshark -k -i -
```

# Jitter measurements

All run with `--release` on `Linux 5.15.0-1032-realtime #35-Ubuntu SMP PREEMPT_RT`, i3-7100T.

```bash
just linux-example-release jitter enp2s0
```

| Test case                                                      | standard deviation (ns) | mean (ns) | comments                                          |
| -------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------- | --------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| 5ms `tokio` timer                                              | 361909                  | 4998604   |                                                   |
| 5ms `tokio-timerfd`                                            | 4264\*                  | 4997493   | std. dev. jumped from 2646 to 4508ns during test  |
| 5ms `tokio-timerfd` + pinned tx/rx thread                      | 14315\*                 | 4997157   | std. dev. jumped from 2945 to 15280ns during test |
| 5ms `tokio-timerfd` + pinned tx/rx thread + pinned loop thread | 117284                  | 4997443   | std. dev. jumps around a lot but max is huge      |
| 5ms `smol::Timer`                                              | 5391\*                  | 4997841   | std. dev. jumped to 11558ns during test           |
| 1ms `smol::Timer`                                              | 21218\*                 | 997581    | Highest std. dev. I saw was 21k ns                |
| 1ms `smol::Timer`, another run                                 | 19224\*                 | 997483    | Just under 2% jitter at 1ms                       |

## Results from oscilloscope

This is running the "1ms `smol::Timer`, another run" case from above, measuring output 1 of an
EL2004 hooked up to an EK1100.

| Measurement                  | Value         |
| ---------------------------- | ------------- |
| Mean (software)              | 997456ns      |
| std. dev. (software)         | 72038ns (~7%) |
| Period std. dev. (oscope)    | ~15us         |
| Frequency std. dev. (oscope) | ~3.5Hz        |

The display flickers occasionally showing some occasional glitches in the output stream which isn't
great. I'm not sure where those might be coming from...

## Kernel/OS/hardware tuning

A good looking guide at <https://rigtorp.se/low-latency-guide/>.

`tokio` is awful, `smol` is much better for jitter. Tokio has 17us SD jitter (oscope) or 347246ns
jitter (34.72) (SW).

`tokio-timerfd` makes things a little better at ~18-23% SW jitter or 11us SD jitter (oscope).

### First changeset

- `tuned-adm profile latency-performance`
- Disable hyperthreading at runtime with `echo off > /sys/devices/system/cpu/smt/control`

#### Run 1

Promising results. 4500ns SD (software), saw a jump up to 16360ns. Seems happy at 15000ns (1.54%)
SD.

Oscope shows 600ns SD (but is shrinking all the time).

I think there was one hiccup at the beginning of the test which skewed the results.

#### Run 2

650ns SW SD, 20ns oscope SD, but reducing continuously.

Saw a jump up to 1156 SW SD not long after startup again, but reducing all the time during run.

Saw a 5676ns (SW) jump, pushed oscope SD up to ~300ns.

Saw a 9265ns (SW) jump, pushed oscope SD up to ~350ns.

Saw a 19565ns (2%) SW jump, pushed oscope SD up to 772ns.

Saw a 28264ns (2.8%) SW jump, pushed oscope SD up to 700ns.
